AWS is all about removing undifferentiated heavy lifting.
As it evolves, we got more services that are meant to take away complexity and maintenance.
Now that we have become used to building with serverless and AWS,
we are beginning to take a step back and still notice that there is still plenty of complexity left.
While we wait for AWS to evolve further and handle more of this for us,
other companies are innovating and try and get there first.
Today, we're going to take a peek at Ampt,
a recently launched solution that builds on AWS but aims to take the pain away
and deliver the utopia of only ever focusing on the business value.
My name is Luciano and today I'm joined by Eoin and this is AWS Bites podcast.
And if you're wondering why I'm wearing a shirt, this is to celebrate our episode number 100 💯 🎉!
So let's get to it.
fourTheorem is the company that makes AWS Bites possible.
If you're looking for a partner to accompany on your crowd journey, check them out at fourtheorem.com.
Okay, Eoin, you spend a little bit of time playing with Ampt
and I think you have a fairly good idea at this point of what it is,
what is the value proposition.
So maybe we can start by describing high level,
what kind of problem does it try to solve and how it works.
I think we've discussed in previous episodes some of the efforts in this space and Ampt was one that sounded really interesting and just recently launched out of beta.
And I was quite curious to give it a try and I'm pretty impressed so far.
We'll go into all the details in a second.
So Ampt, you can find it at getampt.com.
The idea is that it's an approach to building applications and according to them,
it lets developers rapidly build, deploy and scale JavaScript apps in the cloud
without complicated configs or managing infrastructure.
And it's the without part that's probably the most appealing, right?
For people who've been building serverless applications,
you can understand that sometimes it can get pretty complex,
especially when you have to manage configurations of resources,
events, functions, permissions.
So Ampt has been, I think, kind of spun out of the serverless framework
and it's got some big names behind it.
Jeremy Daly is the CEO.
They've got a great team, it seems like,
and Adrian Cockcroft is one of the advisors, him of Netflix and AWS fame.
So I think they've got a pretty good team.
It gives a bit of confidence, I guess.
A few things to note then about the actual product.
It's JavaScript focused, so that includes TypeScript.
And basically right now that means no JS 18.
And it's really focused on building API backends and frontends
then with all of the modern frontend frameworks.
So it's about writing code, not infrastructure.
So what does that mean?
Well, the promise of Ampt seems to be that you deploy your code.
It auto-optimizes and creates the infrastructure for you.
I've seen this term, self-provisioning infrastructure.
So you don't have to worry about creating YAML
and configuring loads of resources.
You're just really writing the code for the logic
and the code that glues pieces of logic and your data together.
And that's really it.
So it's really boiling everything down to the essential fundamentals
and getting rid of all that mess
that we typically have to wrangle with on a daily basis.
And the other interesting thing about it
is that it provides isolation for every environment
and that includes developer sound boxes.
And that's just something that you get out of the box
from day one when you sign up.
And that's something that we've probably seen in AWS environments.
It can take you days, weeks or months or sometimes
to figure out how to do those things correctly.
So that's already a pretty big win.
Absolutely. Sounds really interesting.
But let's try maybe to understand a little bit better.
What kind of applications can you really build?
You mentioned APIs and frontends, but can you use any framework
or are you only forced to use specific things
that Ampt gives you?
Ampt gives you a JavaScript SDK and a CLI to get started with.
And then a couple of frameworks that you can use
if you're already using on the frontend,
Next.js, Nuxt, Remix, Angular, Nest, React, SvelteKit and Vue.
And also Eleventy if you're using Eleventy for static sites.
On the backend then, if you've got an API already
that uses one of the existing Node.js web frameworks
like Fastify, Restify, Koa or Express,
then you can automatically kind of plug those in to Ampt
and get up and running.
I guess the only major difference there is that
you're not doing a create server or a listen.
You're not actually opening a port and listening.
You basically just have one line of code
that's going to wire it into the Ampt ecosystem
and that will connect all of Ampt's magic into the roots
that you write in your code.
So you might then wonder how does this work?
Like if you don't have to create
any infrastructure in advance.
So you only write one type of code.
And this is really just your logic
and setting up the SDKs.
All of the infrastructure is kind of generated from that
or generated in advance.
The term infrastructure from code
as opposed to infrastructure as code
is being used to describe this.
So you don't need any CDK type code.
You don't need any YAML.
It doesn't really compare to things like CDK
or Pulumi or even Wing Lang.
That other new project that kind of gives you a new language
for generating your infrastructure.
You don't really think about the infrastructure
that's being generated too much here with Ampt.
So if you take the example of a database,
right now Ampt supports a key value data store.
So, and it's there and ready for you to use right away.
So in your code, you can start doing sets and gets
and remove operations.
You don't have to create any tables in advance.
And the same goes for objects, storage and events.
Everything's just there out of the box.
So if you take an example of creating an API,
you just write the API implementation
in the framework of choice.
And with one line of code, just wire it in.
And then Ampt will automatically handle the API infrastructure
and routing.
You don't have to think about load balancers
or API gateways, any of that stuff.
You're just writing routes like you would back
in the old days in more, let's say monolithic applications,
maybe.
That's a good point that makes me think about the next question.
Like where does the code run then, right?
There must be some kind of wrapping thing
that happens when you want to deploy to Ampt.
And in order to take all of your code
and package it in such a way that can be effectively
executed in a scalable way on AWS infrastructure, right?
I'd love to know more about exactly how some of this magic works under the hood.
What we do know is that it has this concept of smart compute.
And I think this is one of the most interesting and exciting
parts of Ampt because it allows your code to,
by default, run in Lambda.
And I think from day one, that's where your code will run.
But if they detect that your traffic is consistently high,
they can move that into AppRunner.
And you don't have to do anything.
Or if your tasks start to run for longer,
I think it's longer than five minutes at the moment,
they'll start running your code in Fargate.
I think you have to be on a certain pricing
tier for that to happen.
But the idea there is really nice, right?
That you don't have to think about monitoring
your function, optimizing memory, all of this stuff,
timeouts, scalability, quotas.
The idea that they can take your code
and move it around behind the scenes,
and you don't notice anything, but it's kind of cost
and performance optimized for you,
that's something that's really exciting.
And it's something I can imagine them doing a hell of a lot
more with when you think about maybe even automatically
optimizing your data storage as well.
You asked the question, where does it run?
And we're talking about Lambda and Fargate and AppRunner.
But that means it's running on AWS.
So all of Ampt's infrastructure is built on top of AWS.
And every developer gets their own sandbox,
which is really cool out of the box.
When you deploy as a developer on the team,
you automatically have an isolated environment
that you can share with other team members.
You can kind of share a snapshot of it.
But it's automatically synced as well.
So as long as you're running the Ampt front end,
it's automatically updating your infrastructure and code.
And I think it's doing a lot of smart stuff
in the background there, because the deployments
at times I've seen are pretty fast.
The feedback time is really good.
You can also then deploy your own Ampt server.
You can also then deploy to any stage,
just by running deploy space stage.
And you can create different stages like QA, pre-production,
and production.
This isolated environment, it's a big USP for Ampt,
because they're focused on kind of eliminating
any kind of resource contention problems, noisy neighbors.
And from what I understand of the launch party announcement,
it seems that each environment runs in its own AWS account
under the hood.
So you don't have these noisy neighbor problems
with quotas and rate limits and everything like that.
And I'd love to know how that's done.
But assuming that they've handled all of that,
it's really nice from a user perspective,
because you don't have to worry about setting up
those accounts and managing environments.
It just happens automatically for you.
Yeah, I can definitely see lots of edge cases in trying to think how they might come and implement
all of that.
But I mean, that doesn't mean that it's not possible.
I'm sure that considering that all the smart people that
work at this project, they have figured out
a bunch of interesting solutions,
would be nice at some point to discover some of them.
But that's maybe a topic for another episode.
OK, let's talk how do you get started.
Assuming we are kind of making you excited as well
and you want to know how to get started, what is the first step?
I'd suggest doing what I did, which
is just start with the very simple instructions
on the website.
You just npm install the CLI and then run the frontend
amped command.
And from that, it'll ask you to pick from a number of starter
templates, like an API backend with Express or Fastify,
for example, or a frontend application built on, say,
Astro.
And then it automatically gets generated for you and deployed.
So you immediately then get a link
to a dashboard where they've got a really nice UI where you can
monitor the applications.
And you can see the metrics and logs right away.
So I think the usability and the aesthetics around amped,
I've been pretty happy with.
I think they look much nicer, feel much like a better
developer experience than we're used to.
And there's obviously plenty to be done there,
I think, in terms of making the logs
accessible in different ways.
But I like that it's pretty simple.
And automatically with one command,
you're up and running with that dashboard.
And then you get a generated link for your API endpoint
or a static site, if that's what you've deployed.
OK.
In terms of features, you mentioned already HTTP APIs.
You also mentioned key-value store.
Is there anything else worth mentioning?
On the API side, I guess it's notable
that you've got support for API keys, also web sockets.
And even though I haven't tried it,
I've seen that HTTP response streaming is supported.
And I'm interested in how that works across the different
compute platforms.
But I guess that's another curiosity.
When it comes to the data side, what
I've seen from looking at it and observed
is that it's basically a much nicer API for DynamoDB.
That's what it feels like.
Because with DynamoDB, the API is a little bit strange,
takes a bit of getting used to.
This is like a more developer-friendly API.
So you don't have to create any tables
or worry about creating additional indexes.
You basically get set, remove, and add operations.
So you can do everything pretty much
that you could with DynamoDB through those operations.
And then you have nice things like they automatically
generate metadata, like created timestamps and modified
timestamps for your objects.
And then you have namespaces to separate
what would be your DynamoDB hash key and your range keys.
So it's just a little bit more easy to get used to.
And you don't have to worry about the different types
of operations.
You can just use wildcards, for example,
for searching starts with.
When you need to have secondary keys,
you just provide attributes that are called labels.
And these seem to automatically generate
these secondary keys for you under those.
So that's pretty nice.
So it's really just key value store.
If you need to use anything else,
like relational database, they're
recommending that you use partners
like PlanetScale, MongoDB, Memento,
and you just use their SDK.
They also have a nice support for parameters,
which can be automatically injected
into your application as environment variables.
You can have organization-wide parameters or application
specific parameters.
And then you have object storage,
which is just like S3, but also another simple S3 abstraction.
You don't have to worry about creating and managing buckets.
And then you have events.
And events and tasks are quite a nice feature as well.
So you can have your cron events,
like run events on a schedule every hour.
But you could also get events based on storage and data.
So if you have your data stored in the data store,
you can just say data.on.
And then you can put a filter which
says if an object is written with a certain key,
then call my function.
And this is where the infrastructure just
starts to disappear, because you're just basically writing
what looks like a Node.js event emitter or handler
or something.
It's just an on event, then call this function.
And after handling all of the wiring and the event
every bruise or whatever other magic
is happening under the hood.
I have seen that they create a queue in this account.
I have seen that just from snooping a little bit
into the environment variables in the code and stuff.
So I don't know if that's used for that
or if that's part of a future feature.
That's pretty interesting.
I am a bit curious to know how they deal with things like,
I don't know, if you're passing a callback to this event
interface, how do they actually serialize the callback
in a way that it is, I guess, responsive to events
in a distributed way.
It's not just running in one Node.js process.
But yeah, I don't think we have that information.
We can just speculate.
So again, maybe in future episodes,
we might be able to figure out this magic
and give you more details.
Yeah.
Maybe we can get talking to a member of the Ampt team
at some point and find out all of the great details.
Absolutely.
That would be fun.
But meanwhile, should we talk about pricing?
Because is there going to be a huge pricing,
is there still reasonable?
Because I guess that's where the trade-offs are.
You get a much nicer experience, simpler, get started,
complete your project quickly.
But if it's going to be too expensive,
is it going to be worth it?
Right now, it looks not too bad.
But I guess it depends on your usage.
And there's three tiers.
None of them are ridiculously expensive.
But the pricing is essentially per team member per month.
So you have a preview tier, and that will give you
three apps, 10 environments, and 500 invocations per hour.
And then you have a $7 tier and a $29 tier.
And it gets more capable.
You can have more team members, more apps, long-running tasks,
all of that stuff.
I don't know exactly how this works yet.
Like, if you've got pricing that kind of dictates
the number of invocations per hour,
but what happens if you're doing like a massive number of DynamoDB
calls in that one invocation?
And that causes a lot of spend on their side,
how that's managed.
They also say in the pricing details or in the FAQ,
they're working on implementing spending limits.
And I think that would be a big differentiator.
Obviously, we've talked a lot about how that feature is
missing from AWS.
If they can pull that one off, that would be really cool.
Yeah, that actually makes sense.
Considering they provide you that kind of abstraction layer,
they can probably see what kind of operations
that it's trying to do.
And then if they keep track of all of that
and the cost it might have, I think
they might be able to implement some kind of smart blocker
to limit the expenditure there.
But again, I'm just speculating just because, yeah, of course,
my mind is curious to figure out how would I build that kind
of feature with these ideas.
But speaking of which, another thing that I have in mind
is how easy it is to do CI/CD, which I think these days is
something that everyone is doing, possibly
through things like GitHub Actions.
So is that something mentioned in the documentation,
something you tried yourself?
I've tried a couple of different things.
One is using their GitHub app, which
is a bit like using Netlify or a lot of other services
like that, pretty seamless.
You just connect the GitHub app to Ampt,
and then it can automatically deploy your environment
to branches you set up.
So you can say, from this branch,
deploy to the staging environment,
from another branch, deploy to the production environment.
But you also get feature branch deployments out of the box
with that, which is really cool.
Apart from that, they're basically
just providing examples for you to write your own GitHub
Actions workflows.
And then you're just running the Ampt to deploy command.
So it's pretty straightforward.
It seems like every application is just an isolated piece.
There's no kind of, I guess you would say,
like microservice approach, where you're deploying lots
of things from one repo.
I guess you could do monorepo deployments,
but with separate deployment pipelines for each single
service, if you'd like.
So it seems like if you've got an API backend and then
another Ampt to app for your front end,
you would just do two deployment pipelines or just deploy them
separately in one pipeline, if that makes sense.
It does make sense, even though I'm not sure
how they could manage the fact that you still
have one environment per user.
I guess the question is, when you buy into CI/CD,
is it going to be just one user, or you can still
retain some control of which user space is going to be used?
Oh, yeah.
I think I have the answer to that one,
because when you're deploying from your local environment,
you're just running the Ampt command,
and that picks up your GitHub credentials or whatever way
you've logged in to Ampt, generates an environment name
for you from your name.
But then if you do deploy production,
it's deploying to the production environment, which is shared
by multiple developers.
OK.
So you will use the CI/CD only to deploy
to production, which is a shared account, effectively.
That seems like the pattern, yeah.
Yeah, actually makes a lot of sense.
OK, you mentioned that you were able to see some
of the underlying AWS stuff.
Well, first of all, how did you do that?
Was it really a feature, or did you
figure it out in some kind of an indirect way?
And how much did you get to see?
Yeah, it wasn't any advanced hacking or anything here.
I mean, they make it clear that it's running
on AWS that's completely open.
And then I just ran some code that
printed the environment variables of the process,
so I could see that there was a table name and a bucket name,
and a queue name in there.
And then I tried a few AWS SDK actions.
And I could see that they seem to have implemented
pretty good least privileged IAM policies, because I
wasn't able to do much snooping.
But I could list the objects in the bucket,
and I could do a scan on the DynamoDB table.
So it's not giving you the power to do anything
that you can't already do from the Ampt to SDK.
But like I said, I think they're going
to allow you support to deploy to your own AWS
account in the future, and then you would have full visibility,
I guess.
And you'd also get the benefit of being
able to monitor resources, connect into other AWS
applications, and even achieve compliance,
because it's not all abstracted away from you.
Yeah, that makes sense.
I guess you also get the risk of you
might mess up in different ways, because then you
might have more control that they would want you to have,
and either not change the table schema or stuff like that.
So let's maybe try to wrap up this episode by listing
what do we believe are the trade-offs here,
because of course, this is not going
to be the ultimate silver bullet to develop in the cloud.
I think it's just another way with a different set
of trade-offs, so probably worth remarking what those are.
The idea of Ampt, I don't know if it's
fair to call it like a "serverless Platform-as-a-service"
offering.
I think if it's very clear what applications
it's going to be geared for and optimizes for those,
I think it looks really, really promising.
Of course, if you compare it to the options in AWS,
there's a big trade-off, because AWS has hundreds of options
and thousands of permutations for building applications
like this.
In Ampt, you have a very limited set of options,
but that can be a really good thing.
Like in AWS, you have all the databases, all different types,
and then you have services for data analytics and machine
learning and chat and video, sending email.
With Ampt, it's more like a pass where
you will write the code for your business logic
and then integrate it into AWS services or other SaaS
to achieve all of that.
And it just depends on how much control you
want over that infrastructure.
There's other trade-offs there.
Like it doesn't seem to have very fine-grained access
control right now.
I don't know how that's going to work in the future.
The only way of protecting what you deploy
is to have an API key right now.
But I'm sure that will change.
They do mention that they will be providing support
for private VPCs if you have network connectivity needs
as well.
I'm also interested if there is a potential trade-off here
with the ability to have this code moving from Lambda
to Fargate to AppRunner.
Are there some cases where you might write code
that may run well because it's running in one environment
and then suddenly it starts running in another environment
but it won't execute correctly?
I know that if you've got container code,
sometimes it won't run in Lambda.
Yeah, I definitely had that question in mind as well.
And I was wondering, on the timeout example
that you gave before, what happens?
Do you get the timeout first and then they start to move
your compute to something else?
So you have a failure in the transition between one system
to the other?
Or there is some amazing smart system
that figures out before you get there and moves you in time
and avoids any failure, which I don't
know if it's even possible.
But I think that would be really cool if it worked that way.
So definitely curious to find out more.
And hopefully we will have the opportunity to do that.
But overall, I think it's fair to say
that if you're building web applications, API or full stack
application, Ampt seems like a very interesting contender,
definitely innovating in this space.
So it can also make a lot of things easier,
which is great to see.
So if you're building something that sticks
to the fundamentals of event-driven applications
or event-driven logic, API, compute data storage,
probably you can build a lot of complex things.
So you probably don't need all the potential of AWS
and all the millions of permutation and configuration
options.
So in that sense, it might really
be a good platform to use for many different kinds
of projects.
So we'll try to see if we will have in the future
the opportunity to try it in a more serious project, something
more big scale or production-ready,
just to see what the experience will
look like when you try to do something a little bit more
ambitious.
But there are actually some customer case studies
that you can see on the Ampt website.
So if you're curious to see what are some real cases that
exist today in the market, you can check out that page
and get yourself more informed on the capabilities
and the different solutions that people have built with this.
Now, again, I think it's worth remarking
that it's really admirable to see somebody trying
to innovate the cloud space, which it changes every day,
but we haven't seen this level of fundamentals
which in a while.
So I think it's trying to push a different approach.
And that's really something that is always really welcome,
because I think from this kind of ideas
come the best innovations that we see in general in the tech
industry.
So let's keep an open eye for the future of Ampt
or maybe other similar alternatives.
If there are other tools like this that you have been using
and you are happy with, please share them with us.
We'd be looking forward to check your suggestions
and maybe think about other episodes
where we explore alternatives like Ampt.
So that's all for today, and we look forward
to seeing you in the next episode.